  GF1 (Gipf for one)
  Kurt Van den Branden (kurtvdb@village.uunet.be)


  GF1 is a computer program for playing the 2 player boardgame GIPF.
  The program has a nice and easy to use graphical user interface.  You
  can play against another human (but the real game is better for that),
  against the computer, or let the computer play against itself.  The
  computer player is good enough to beat even the best human players at
  the moment (but it doesn't always win :-) ).

  1.  What is this game called GIPF?

  GIPF is a strategic game for two players based on a classic concept:
  in turns, players introduce one piece into play until achieving four-
  in-a-row. Players then remove their row and capture any of their
  opponent's pieces which extend that row. This principle of capturing
  pieces creates each time again completely changed situations on the
  board. The purpose is to form successive rows of at least 4 pieces,
  until the opponent has no piece left to bring into play.

  (This description was copied from the official GIPF web-site. For more
  info about the GIPF-game, check http://www.gipf.com)


     REMARK:
        This manual does not contain the rules for GIPF. If you don't
        know the game yet, go and buy it or check the GIPF homepage.


  2.  Manual for the impatient

  This part of the manual will teach you enough about the program to
  start playing against the computer as quick as possible.

  If you want to know everything about all the different menu-options,
  then you will have to read the next chapters.


  2.1.  Game Setup

  You can change the strength of the computer-player with the
  "Setup"-option in the File-menu.

  Choose one of the levels for computer strength and press the OK-
  button.  Level 1 is a very bad player, only appropriate for beginners.
  Level 8 is a very, very good player, but one move from the computer
  make take an hour or longer. Level 4 and 5 are strong players which
  don't take too long thinking about their moves.


  2.2.  Start a new game

  You start a game with the New-option from the File-menu.

  The window shown contains several areas: For general things about the
  new game and things that must be setup for each player separatly.

  The first thing you should choose is what kind of game to play. The 3
  different games described in the GIPF-rules are available: basic,
  standard and tournament.

  The "Timed game"-option allows you to make the game more difficult by
  restricting the time you have for playing a complete game. If you
  check this option, you can also change the time each player has for
  the game.  (You can give the players a different time.)
  Now you have to choose who will play white and black. For each color
  you can choose if it will be controlled by a human- or a computer-
  player, you can enter the player-name, and if you chose the "Timed
  game"-option, then you can also change the time allowed for a game.

  When you are happy with your selections, press OK and the game will
  start.


  2.3.  Play the game

  single pieces on the board are white (really light yellow) and black.
  Gipf pieces of both colours have an extra gray circle on them.

  How to make a move:

  o  Click on one of the black circles around the gameboard to set the
     point from where you want to add a piece.  The new piece will be
     shown on that position

  o  Click on the point where you want to move your new piece.  A red
     cross will appear there.

  o  Now click on the 'Execute move'-button under the gameboard and your
     move will be executed.

  o  At the beginning of a tournament game you can add gipf-pieces, when
     you want to stop adding gipf-pieces just click again on the piece
     you are adding. this will replace the gipf-piece with a normal
     piece. (Clicking again will change the piece to a gipf again.)


  In some circumstances the program will ask you if you want to remove a
  row of pieces or gipf-pieces. The relevant pieces are shown on the
  board with a red cross on them.

  The program automatically detects if the game is finished and will
  tell you who won and how many moves it took.


  3.  Screen layout

  The main GF1-window consists of several sections.

  At the top you have the menu-bar and at the bottom you have buttons
  which differ depending on what you are doing.  In the middle you can
  see from left to right:

  o  Information about the white player (Player name, timer, number of
     pieces left, number of pieces lost)

  o  The gipf-board

  o  Information about the black player

  o  A log of all the moves

  The player-name with a red background shows whose turn it is.

  If you set the "show position names"-option in the setup-window, then
  you will see the position-name of the position you are over appear if
  you stay over the same place on the gameboard for 1/2 a second.

  The pieces for playing GIPF are shown on the board as white (really
  light yellow) and black discs. Gipf pieces (2 normal pieces on top of
  each other) have an extra gray circle on them.
  4.  Moving pieces on the board

  Making a move consists of several steps:

  o  Click on one of the black circles around the gameboard to set the
     point from where you want to add a piece.  The new piece will be
     shown on that position

  o  Click on the point where you want to move your new piece.  A red
     cross will appear there.

  o  Now click on the 'Execute move'-button under the gameboard and your
     move will be executed. Pressing <enter> also executes your move.
     Clicking a second time on the position with the red cross will also
     execute the move.


  At the beginning of a tournament game you can add gipf-pieces to the
  game.  When you want to stop adding gipf-pieces, just click again on
  the piece you are adding, the gipf-piece will be replaced with a
  normal piece.

  When the computer-player is thinking on what move to make, a window is
  shown with a "thinker" and a button which allows you to interrupt the
  computer.


  5.  Removing a row of pieces or a gipf-piece

  Every time a row of four pieces of the same colours occurs on the
  board, this row is automatically removed from the board by the
  program.

  When more then 1 row of the same colour is on the board at the same
  time, the program will ask the corresponding player what row to remove
  first.  The row you can remove at that moment will be made clear with
  red crosses on top of the pieces.

  Something similar occurs when you have the chance to remove a gipf-
  piece from the board. The piece that can be removed will get a red
  cross and the program will ask you if you want to remove it or not.


     REMARK:
        Even when you can remove a gipf-piece from your opponent from
        the board will the program ask you if you want to do this. In
        some situations it can be benificial to leave your opponents
        gipf on the board.


  6.  Playing with a timer

  Playing a timed game is like playing with a chess-clock.

  When it's your turn, your clock will run down. When it's your
  opponents move, your clock will stop and his will start.

  When one of the players runs out of time, he loses instantly.

  The computer-player is smart enough not to run out of time. When his
  current strenght level would cause him to run out of time, he will
  automatically switch to a lower setting.




  7.  Edit a gameboard

  When you use the "Edit board"-option from the Edit menu, the user-
  interface changes to allow you to edit the gameboard in any way you
  like.

  In this mode you can add or remove pieces or gipf-pieces of any colour
  and change the "lost pieces"-counters to create any gipf-situation you
  want.

  When you changed the board to your liking, you can start playing from
  that situation.


  7.1.  Select what type of piece to add

  There are 2 ways to select the type of piece you want to add to the
  board:

  o  At the bottom of the window is a button that shows the currently
     selected piece to be added. Clicking this button allows you to
     change it to any of the possibilities.

  o  When you right-click with your mouse over the game-board you can
     also select the type of piece to add. This will immediatly be shown
     on the button at the bottom also.


  7.2.  Add or remove a piece from the board

  To add a piece, just move the mouse over the position where you want
  to put the new piece and click. This will put the currently selected
  type of piece at that position and adapt the counter of available
  pieces for the corresponding colour.

  Removing a piece is just as easy. Move the mouse over the piece you
  want to remove and click. The piece will be removed and the
  corresponding counter adapted.

  If you want to replace a piece with a different one then you have to
  click twice, once to remove the old piece and again to place the new
  piece.


  7.3.  Changing the "lost pieces"-counters

  For changing the number of pieces lost by each player there are 2
  counters at the bottom of the window.

  Pressing the left-button of a counter will decrease the number (not
  below 0), pressing the right-button will increase it.

  Automatically, the number of available pieces will be updated
  correctly.


  8.  The menubar


  8.1.  File menu

  The File menu contains general options for dealing with a game of
  GIPF.



     New game
        This is the option to use when you want to start a new game. It
        opens a window allowing you to enter all the settings necessary
        for a game of GIPF:

     o  Game type: Here you choose the type of game you want to play.
        These options correspond to the 3 game-types explained in the
        official GIPF-rules.

     o  Timed game: Turn this option on if you want to restrict the time
        each player has for playing a complete game.

     o  Player (white and black): For each colour you can choose what
        kind of player will use it. Choose human for one colour and
        computer for the other if you want to play against the computer,
        but both sides human or both sides computer are also valid
        settings.

     o  Player name (white and black): The names entered here will be
        shown on each side of the game-board.

     o  Player time (white and black): If you turned on the "Timed
        game"-option then you can change the number of minutes allowed
        for each player.


     Load game
        Load a game that you saved earlier. If you saved during a game
        then you can resume the game from where you stopped.


     Save game
        Save a game in progress. This allows you to return to the game
        later. A window will open where you can enter a filename.


     Save log
        If you just finished a memorable game then you can use this
        option to save all your moves to a file. In case you want to see
        later how you won (or lost) that game.


     Setup
        Change game settings:

     o  Computer strength: From 1 to 8, level one is for absolute
        beginners, from level 4 on the computer plays quite strong. At
        settings above 5 the computer can take a long time calculating
        his move.

     o  Move animation: If you turn the animation on, every move you
        make will be shown with moving pieces (This makes it easier to
        understand what is happening).

     o  Wait before computer move: To make computer moves easier to
        understand you can make the program wait before executing each
        computer move. The program will show what move the computer
        intends to make and wait the number of seconds you enter here.

     o  Wait before removing a row/gipf: To make it easier to understand
        what happens when rows and gipf-pieces are removed from the
        board, you can set this to something different then 0. The
        computer will then show what it intends to remove and wait a
        number of seconds.


     o  Show position names: If you set this option then position-names
        will be shown on the board when you move over it.


     Exit
        Stop the program. Make sure you saved the current game if
        necessary.


  8.2.  Edit menu

  Only the first option from the Edit menu (Edit board) can be used when
  you are not in the edit mode of the program. 'Save board' and 'Make
  drawing' can also be used when you are playing a game. But the others
  are only available when you are editing the game-board.


     Edit board
        Start editing the game-board. (See above for how this works)

     Start game
        Start a game from the board-situation you were editing. A window
        opens allowing you to start a game.

     Computer move
        Have the computer calculate one move from the current board-
        position. You can choose if it is white or black who has to play
        and the strength of the computer (higher is better).

     Clear board
        Empty the board, put it in the same situation like the start of
        a tournament-game.

     Restore board
        Restore the board to the situation before your started editing
        the board. Also exit edit-mode and return to play-mode.

     Load board
        Load a board-position from a file.

     Save board
        Save the current board-position to a file.

     Make drawing
        Make a png-file of the current board-situation. You can specify
        a file-name, the size of the resulting picture and an
        accompanying text.


  8.3.  UNDO

  When you use UNDO, the game will be returned to the situation before
  you made your last move. This allows you to try again if you made a
  stupid mistake.

  This option from the menubar is only usable under certain conditions:

  o  During a game

  o  When you are not playing a timed game. (this would be too much like
     cheating)

  REMARK: You can only do UNDO once at a certain moment in the game. It
  is not possible to press UNDO several times to go back more than 1
  move.

  8.4.  Help menu

  This menu contains only 2 options.

  The HELP-option opens a window containing the complete GF1-manual.  At
  the top you get a list of all the different chapters in the manual.
  When you click on one of the lines, the helptext will immediatly jump
  to the correct chapter. The help-window can be left open while
  playing.

  The ABOUT-option just opens a window showing the version of GF1 you
  are using and the author. Press enter or click on the window to remove
  it.  (This is the same window you see when GF1 starts up. At startup,
  the window goes away automatically after 5 seconds.)


  9.  Contact-information and Copyrights


  9.1.  Contact-information



     Author:
        Kurt Van den Branden

     Address:

        Heiveldstraat 72
        B-9120 Beveren
        Belgium



     e-mail:
        kurtvdb@village.uunet.be

     GF1 homepage:
        http://gf1.sourceforge.net/

     GF1 users mailinglist:
        If you want to keep up-to-date with GF1 developments, subscribe
        to the mailinglist
        (http://gf1.sourceforge.net/services.html#mailinglist)

  REMARK: GF1 is free, but please send me a postcard if you like it (a
  paper postcard, not an electronic one).  You can also send me money if
  you like.


  9.2.  Copyrights


  o  GF1 (C) 1998-2000, Kurt Van den Branden.

     You can use this program for what ever you want, but don't come
     complaining to me if it explodes in your face :-).

     You can even get the source-code for this program, so you can
     change it if you want. But if you have a useful change, please send
     it back to me so everybody can use it.





     This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
     the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
     (at your option) any later version.

     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
     but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
     GNU General Public License for more details.

     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
     along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
     Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.





  o  GIPF, (C) en (R) Don & Co nv, 1997. All rights reserved.















































